# Using AMD FlyDSL for the MXFP4 GEMM on MI355X GPU

There is currently an 1.1M$ AMD-sponsored competition going on at GPUMODE, which in itself is a staggering amount of money. The problems are optimizing MLA, MoE and GEMM in low-precision formats for the new MI355X GPU, and then porting the solutions to vLLM for efficient serving.

For this competition, I did not have full time to participate due to a university trip to Singapore, and the competition ends in a week, however I did have some time to try out the AMD FlyDSL, which is AMD's answer to CuteDSL. It was released officially 6 weeks ago. If you are unfamiliar with either, they are both Python-based domain-specific languages that allow you to write ML workloads on a higher level, such as Python and then run their own compilation path that avoids legacy compilation for the more domain-specific-ML-use-cases.

---

We note that there is already a very similar kernel available in the FlyDSL example kernels, except in our case we are running mxfp4 instead of fp8:

https://github.com/ROCm/FlyDSL/blob/main/kernels/blockscale_preshuffle_gemm.py

We can simply port it over to the competition format, and adjust the types a bit.

---

**Note** that the my code was written 3 weeks ago, by now, AMD has already improved one of my main pain-points by moving some common MLIR-templates into the flydsl.expr directory. This simplifies the code and reduces the line-count, making the DSL feel more like a DSL and less like just writing arith/vector MLIR.

The old code I based my solution off can be found here:

https://github.com/ROCm/FlyDSL/blob/7335d6f4dc42ab8898ca66dc7389772c93346277/kernels/blockscale_preshuffle_gemm.py

My solution can be found in a GIST here:

https://gist.github.com/arseniivanov/9d59d889db19119eb9bfd7f58c886925

Here are some benchmarks comparing PyTorch Eager and unoptimized FlyDSL for the 6 competition shapes.

Pytorch Eager:  
⚡ 499 µs 🐌 856 µs  
⚡ 1151 µs 🐌 1280 µs  
⚡ 510 µs 🐌 1054 µs  
⚡ 482 µs 🐌 1442 µs  
⚡ 1124 µs 🐌 1370 µs  
⚡ 621 µs 🐌 1008 µs  

FlyDSL:  
⚡ 550 µs 🐌 984 µs  
⚡ 608 µs 🐌 1059 µs  
⚡ 561 µs 🐌 973 µs  
⚡ 554 µs 🐌 2.40 ms  
⚡ 566 µs 🐌 1079 µs  
⚡ 601 µs 🐌 973 µs  

We can see that we slightly beat PyTorch Eager using this almost out-of-the-box solution. It is of course possible to optimize the FlyDSL solution much further. We can often assume alignment and load larger chunks at once for example, or use async loads. But because of the practicality and constraints of the competition, such as it being 3 weeks from announcement to end (now extended to 4), I chose to stick with Triton because of better out-of-the-box performance and my own domain knowledge. More on that in a blog in a week or two.

---

# Summary

Here is my feeling/vibe of FlyDSL based off this.
## Pros:
* Fast compile-times makes for a better competition developer experience, faster iterations
## Cons:
* Hard to make performant out of the box on specific competition problems
* Very early and fast-moving, design decisions and libraries similar to CuteDSL helpers like cute.sm100_utils not yet fully in place

In general, looking at how Triton has outdone AITER in some parts of this competition, I am quite hopeful that the flexibility of FlyDSL can improve performance over the existing solutions as it gets more mature. A lot of the existing compiler stacks were not made for ML-specific workloads, and there is efficiency to extract by constraining the space of possibilities to only ML-specifics.
